as Israel continues its bombardment of
Gaza violence against Palestinians in
the West Bank is escalating human rights
groups say that settlers and military
forces alike are using the cover of this
war to step up their ongoing campaign of
brutal attacks on Palestinian
communities Israel is conducting raids
and air strikes and what it says are
attempts to root out possible militant
groups as the territory buckles under
military lockdown with us to discuss the
situation in the West Bank is the
Palestinian authorities ambassador to
the United Kingdom husam zlet husam
thank you for joining us on up
front hello mark thank you for having me
and good to see you absolutely uh
violence towards Palestinians in the
West Bank has surged since hamas's
attack escalating what was already the
deadliest year since the United Nations
began tracking in
2005 uh settlers and Israeli forces have
killed at least 155 Palestinians
including 41 children they've also
injured more than 2,200 more Israeli
forces are carrying out raids and air
strikes and have placed the West Bank
under a military lockdown which makes it
extremely difficult for residents to
leave their cities and their towns uh
help me understand a little bit more
about what's going on on the ground well
what is going on on the ground has been
going on for a long time Mark you've
seen the um expansion of this illegal
Colonial settlements uh you have seen
the checkpoints the walls the
infrastructure built uh to allow these
colonial cities now to actually be
connected to Israel uh and encycle the
uh the main Urban centers of the
Palestinian people and now we are faced
with a very organized settler militias
who have been on the Rampage over the
last uh couple of years but particularly
uh since the aggression on Gaza began
they took that not only from a militia
point of view but from a political point
of view because they have their masters
and their masters are senior ministers
in the government you know this
Government is made of several illegal
settlers including smotrich and Bing and
nanyu himself as the big backer of the
settlement exercise the world has seen
Bing who is a con convicted
terrorist in an Israeli Court not even
in an international Court handing
machine guns over the last few weeks
since the war on Gaza began uh to
settlers and to civilians and the
results is what you just described uh uh
a huge number unprecedented uh murders
and killing of Palestinian civilians in
the West Bank attacks all over Villages
uh uh uh programs in every sense setting
far on homes shops cars uh in including
their shaff only a few days ago and many
other uh towns and Villages around the
West Bank and the and the plan is very
clear the plan is to uh terrorize the
population and to uh uh continue what
they have begun in 1948 and here the
link between the West Bank and Gaza and
here is the mistake of anyone to discuss
Gaza uh in isolation of the West Bank
and the West Bank including of course
Jerusalem in isolation of Gaza and let
me just confirm that what Israel is
doing now in Gaza Mark is a rerun of the
1948 nakba events are you worried that
this could get even worse I mean
according according to the UN daily
settler taxs in the West Bank have
doubled in the weeks following the
October 7th uh events uh Ultra National
settlers in the West Bank have driven
out entire Villages they've killed at
least eight Palestinians and human
rights organizations are warning that
the focus on Gaza is being used as a
kind of pretext to drive people out of
their Villages as you pointed out very
similar to the neba of 1948 in fact
people have received Arabic language
leaflets that warn uh Palestinians that
quote this is their last chance to flee
to Jordan before quote we forcefully
expel you from our holy lands saying you
wanted a NECA like in 194 48 and we will
bring down on you a big catastrophe soon
this seems potentially worse than
anything we've seen since 1948 is that
an
overstatement no it is not but the only
thing that I would add it's not they're
using Gaza to gas light or deflate no no
they are just doing the same in the West
Bank and Gaza the very same plan they're
pushing the very same people the
Palestinian people and since the very
beginning uh of of the aggression we
have been saying and warning everybody
this isn't a war on Hamas this is war on
the Palestinian people this is to finish
off the unfinished business what they
have been describing and today we have
militias in the West Bank Distributing
leaflets spreading fear attacking
communities in the hope that these
communities will have to be forced out
of their homes and then the hope that
these settlers illegally living in the
occupied territory will actually take
over their homes as and physically live
in their homes as they did in
1948 so why is Israel doing this it is
definitely to terrorize the entire
nation the whole people of Gaza pushed
them out towards Sinai H one of the ways
that the Palestinian people now uh are
supported in their efforts to resist is
through the Palestinian Authority the
PA's president Mahmud Abbas said that
the PLO is the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people
but there are many Palestinians as you
know who are unhappy with President abas
one Palestinian asked where are they
when we need them when settlers attack
Us in the fields on the roads earlier
this year just
19% said they trusted fet and the
majority said that the PA should
actually be dissolved given the high
level of mistrust and the fact that the
PA has not had a presidential election
since
2005 should the PA or should the PLO be
the representative of all Palestinian
people is it fair to say that you're the
representative of all the Palestinian
people you have to number one president
Abbas is elected by his movement that is
fat that was founded by him and and the
late president Yas Arafat and many of
their colleagues that's the national
movement that has really turned us from
refugees to Freedom Fighters snatched
the recognition from the entire world
when we were absolutely disappearing
after the neba of 48 and enforce that
Palestinians have one voice one flag one
address one representation now this is a
must this is the biggest achievement of
the palan people that we have one voice
and we will not allow anybody to
undermine that this is different than
individuals and personalities we there
are many nations who have absolutely
vanished from Earth because they were
leaderless because they had no National
institutions to represent them and don't
let me start here listing you how many
people history is full of people who
have completely been enh heled so the
most important thing that we speak in
one voice yes there are concerns there
are demands when we need to reform we
need to to bring our representation to
the most democratic values and standards
that's all understood and we must do
that however don't throw the baby with
the bathtub the PLO remains there as the
umbrella for every Palestinian
organization and you know this is about
making sure that at least you uh enable
your people to stay and and and and
steadfast however the issue of who lead
the Palestinian people is a Palestinian
Palestinian issue many of the
Palestinian people are saying they're
dissatisfied with the PA they're saying
they want it to dissolve they're saying
they don't trust fat obvious obvious
obvious obviously they don't trust H
either but but they're saying we don't
trust things I mean I my question to you
is only how strong can a mandate be if
many people are saying hey we have
skepticism we have distrust we want to
change you know I've seen the I've seen
the opinion polls about Netanyahu in
Israel in the last few days I've seen
the polls about Biden and he has scored
the lowest among even his own his own
party so this is not the discussion the
Palestinian people are under the most
horrific attack since 1948 and this is
not now about Palestinian Palestinian
differences this is about Palestinian
Palestinian Unity we are united by our
oppression by the fact of our oppression
and we are united by a goal to liberate
ourselves and get rid of this occupation
we are united as a people and we do have
a political system that represent all of
us and Palestinians are united and we
have an address and this address has
committed to International consensus and
resolutions for 30 years and this
address has even recognized Israel 30
years ago and this address is uh
committing to nonviolence and
negotiations and this address is ready
but once there is enough commit
sufficient commitment uh that this is
the the the the way forward however if
this address believes that this is not
possible that this is not on the card I
believe you the PLO I I tell you the PLO
has now a very important Crossroad
Crossroad Crossroad we are at a fork to
decide our next move how do we protect
our people how do we protect part of
part of his protecting people H and part
of his protecting Gaza the reason why I
was asking about leadership partly is
because there's been a lot of
speculation about who would govern Gaza
if Hamas were defeated the US of course
has been pushing for the PA to take on a
leadership role uh it seems unlikely
that Israel wants to hand over control
to anybody much less the pa uh on Monday
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu said that Israel would control
The Enclave for an indefinite period
taking on quote the overall security
responsibility because we've seen what
happens when we don't have it what some
fear is that the Gaza Strip is going to
be reoccupied and partly how it's going
to be reoccupied is by people pointing
to an ostensible leadership Gap what do
you make of that you know many many say
the day after and Israel is waiting
who's going to take over who's going to
control number number one no one should
control no one can control only the one
entity that can be in Gaza is an entity
that can provide protection for its
people not control of its people that's
number one number two Israel is not
interested in the Palestinian Authority
coming back to Gaza I assure you 100%
they are not interested you know why
because they know the coming back of the
national institutions would actually
bring back to the four the state of
Palestine the unity of the of the land
the unity of the People Israel has been
so adamant in maintaining the
Palestinian Division and should I list
to you examples Mark you know the
examples over the last few years you
know what netan has been doing to
maintain the division this is not the
time to talk about it this is the the
time to say that all this talk all this
discussion about the day after is used
to create schisms and to create tension
in Palestine among Palestinians we don't
need it only only the state of Palestine
can take over we have learned the lesson
of Oslo first come the end of occupation
including Gaza because Gaza has been
under occupation since Oslo and since 16
years ago Israel just removed itself but
controlled every single aspect of the
people of Gaza their movement their
drinking water their electricity and you
know the rest the L and therefore this
is a time when we focus on bringing a
momentum to end Israel's occupation and
then the Palestinian people have their
institutions the Palestinian people have
their state the Palestinian people have
their legitimacy it's only the US and
the UK and the West who has not come
along that legitimacy and who would want
to find partial solutions they have no
partners for that they will not have a
partner for that ham zlet thank you so
much for joining us in up front all
right everyone that is our show up front
we'll be back next
[Music]
week